[Transcript missing]
So the guts of the API then is really
this kind of layers and animations.
And these are basically the
main Objective-C objects you're
going to be dealing with.
So that's what we're going to
start talking about in a minute.
But just one final thought is that
another way of looking at CA is
that it's kind of one of the few
OS X technologies that really lets
you kind of easily combine all
the different kind of graphics
frameworks that we have available,
whether that be Quartz 2D or
Quartz Composer or Core Image,
OpenGL, QuickTime.
You name it,
you probably have a way to let
you display it through a CA layer.
Okay, so what is a layer?
So a layer is the thing that lets
you describe your graphical scene.
As we want to be able to
have lots of these things,
we try to make them fairly lightweight.
It has a bunch of different properties,
so you can describe things like,
you know, where is it on screen,
what does it contain,
how long does it play for, how fast.
You can arrange them in a hierarchy,
so you can have, you know,
you typically have a root layer,
and then the root layer has sub-layers,
and then the sub-layers have sub-layers,
and so on and so forth.
And this content, it's basically just the
bitmap in the final analysis,
but there's a lot of places
that bitmap can come from.
So you can have Core Graphics
or Quartz 2D rendering,
you can have Core Graphics images,
you can have OpenGL rendering,
you can have Quartz
Composer compositions,
QuickTime movies.
The list is pretty wide-ranging.
And so the kind of the application
programming model that we provide
you is that you basically get to
arrange these little layer objects,
you know, to describe exactly what
you want to see on screen,
and then you kind of hand it off to us,
and then we will take over
from that point and basically
make sure that it's rendered,
you know,
as often or as seldom as necessary
to give you the best output.
You know, we care about the refresh
rates of the display,
how the animations are running,
all this kind of stuff.
And the idea is we also do that
in a background thread so that
you really don't have to care,
and it never even
blocks your application.
Okay, so the second half of the API I'm
putting is the animations.
And so as I was kind of describing,
layers are basically these
little bags of properties.
So obviously,
kind of the obvious way to do animations
is that you have things that can
describe how properties change over time.
So that could be something like,
you know,
the layer has a position property which
describes where it is on the screen.
And so you may want to say, you know,
starting at time T for the next second,
I want this thing to
move from here to here.
So that's the kind of thing
we let you kind of wrap up
in these animation objects.
The details here are that, you know,
there's lots, well, not lots,
but there's a few different
types of animation class.
And they all do this kind of same thing,
but they let you compute those kind of
state changes in slightly different ways.
So for example,
we have this in code of basic animation,
which literally does just let
you have a formula to position,
which is what you want
in kind of a lot of,
you know, 80% of cases maybe.
Then there's kind of a parallel
class called the keyframe animation,
which lets you describe these
kind of state changes as a kind
of a list of keyframe values.
And then we will kind of interpolate
between the keyframes based on how,
you know, based on how far you are
along in the timeline.
And then finally, there's another type of
animation called a transition.
And then transition is
not used that often,
but it's used when you're unable
to animate the properties directly.
For example, you may have a list.
The filter's on the last, say,
and it contains maybe
a Gaussian blur filter.
And then you change that, and you say,
now I want to have a crystallized filter.
And obviously,
there's no way we can just kind of
animate property changes to kind of
map from one to the other because
they're fundamentally different.
But what we can do is
we can add a transition,
and that basically takes the before and
after kind of image representations of
what you see on screen and does some
kind of transition effect between them.
So these are kind of the things
you would see in Keynote,
like cube transitions and
crossfades and dissolves.
And that kind of thing.
Also, animations are not limited to
just changing a single property
or having a single effect.
Just like layers,
you can group them hierarchically,
and that is typically
done for timing control.
You know, you can create a group and
have a group of subanimations,
and then you can kind of define the
timing curves on the group rather
than each individual animation.
And finally, again, just like rendering,
all of these animations run
entirely in the background.
So once you add an animation to a layer,
you can kind of create a subanimation.
And then once you add
an animation to a layer,
then you really don't need
to care much about it.
You can get notifications or
delegate callbacks when the
animation starts and stops,
and you can remove them
and you can query them.
But other than that, you don't have to do
anything every frame.
Just like you heard in the
session earlier this morning,
you know,
the whole idea is we want to free your
application from having to care anything
about what happens at frame rate.
Because we think we can do it faster.
Okay, so just briefly,
this is the kind of overview
of all these animation classes.
And you don't really need
to absorb anything here,
just to see that there are, you know,
this kind of class hierarchy
with different types of animation
and different properties.
And that's about it.
So let's wrap up this section just
by giving you a little example of,
you know, how do you code to this stuff.
So our example here is two halves.
The first half is going to create
a layer and basically attach it to
a parent who we hope is on screen.
So we're going to create a layer.
We're going to set its frame,
which is its geometry.
And in this case, we're going to say,
you know, you have this rectangle, which,
because we're setting the frame,
that is in the parent's coordinate space.
And then we're going to give it an image.
This is just some CG image we
loaded off disk or whatever.
And so the final statement there is we're
going to add this layer to its parent,
to the parent's list of sub-layers.
It will be appended at
the end of this model one.
And so at this point,
assuming the parent is visible,
then our layer is now on screen.
So that really is what there is to it.
Just to make it a little
more of an example,
then we're going to say, well,
now we've added it,
we really want it to fade
in over the first second.
So the way we can do that is by
creating one of these animation objects,
setting its keypath
property to be opacity,
because we want to animate the
opacity property of the layer,
and then giving it a formula
to value of zero to one.
So that's going to take... So the
way we can do that is by creating
one of these animation objects,
setting its keypath
property to be opacity,
because we want to animate the
opacity from zero to one over
the time period of the animation,
which you can see the
next line is set to one,
i.e.
one second.
And since the default start time
for animations is when you add it,
then when we add that to the
layer in the next statement,
what will happen is that
as the layer appears,
because we just added it,
its opacity will ramp up from
zero to one over a second.
Once the animation is finished,
it will be deleted from the layer and
everything will just go on as normal.
Okay, so now we're going to talk more
about the details of how CA works.
And the first thing I want to talk
about is this idea of having two trees.
And so, you know,
we think about the layer
tree a lot because it's,
you know,
it's the object to see data structure.
It's the thing you can modify.
And so in this case here, we have,
you know, several layers and
I arranged the hierarchy.
And the content, you know,
can be different things.
It really doesn't matter.
But always behind the scenes,
we have this thing
called the render tree.
And the render tree is kind of
our lower-level representation
of this same data structure.
You know, every time you make a change in
the layer tree at some point,
we're going to have to try and do a
corresponding change to kind of update
the render tree to be the same thing,
effectively.
And this is the thing
we actually render from.
And the reason for that is that,
you know, as I keep saying,
we want to be rendering on a
background thread at all times.
And so we don't want you to be able to
lock us out of rendering ever because,
you know,
that would be bad and we'd drop frames.
So the render thread is really
this thing that keeps spinning,
keeps looking at this render tree
and kind of pulling frames of it
and putting them on the screen.
So then the question then becomes,
I guess, is that, you know,
we have a layer tree and a render tree.
And how do we get state
changes from one to the other?
Well,
We had this idea of transactions,
and transactions obviously
come from database theory.
And ours is kind of a very
weak attempt at writing on
their coattails or something,
because our transactions are really just
a way to batch up state changes in such a
way that they get copied from one to the
other in a single kind of atomic unit.
So what this means for you
is that every time you're
spinning around your event loop,
your run loop in Cocoa or whatever,
then you're making changes to
these layers for every event.
And so by default,
we will set things up so that
every time around that event loop,
we will create a single transaction,
kind of batch up all the changes,
and then when your event loop
gets back to the run loop,
we can say, oh, we saw they've done kind
of some unit of stuff,
and we will take that stuff and throw
it over the wall to the render tree.
So that's kind of what we
call an implicit transaction,
but that's not really necessary
to know that right now.
But the thing to take away is that this
doesn't have an automatically... Sorry,
I just said it did have an automatically.
So the thing to take away
is that there are two trees,
and every now and then
you may have to care,
although hopefully not very often,
that you have to push things
from one to the other.
And like I said,
it does have an automatically
most of the time.
So next I want to talk about geometry.
Obviously,
geometry is very important for layers,
because geometry is how
things are arranged on screen,
and without this, we would see nothing.
So every layer has a bounds rectangle,
and the bounds rectangle,
which is the bounds
property of the layer,
defines kind of the layer's
internal coordinate space.
What that means is that any
drawing you do within the layer,
or any positioning of sublayers,
is within that kind of local coordinate
space defined by the bounds rectangle.
And you can see in the picture here,
we have a dotted line, or a dotted box,
which is trying to
represent our superlayer,
and we have a smaller graphic,
which represents the
layer we're talking about.
And you can see we've
highlighted its width and height,
and those are the two subparts
of the bounds rectangle.
So every layer also has a position,
and the position is not defined in
the layer's own coordinate space.
It's defined in the
parent's coordinate space,
the super layer's coordinate space.
And what that means is that when you,
because keep in mind that all the
time we're trying to take this little
layer and map it into its super layer.
I mean, that's basically what
we're talking about here.
So the layer has a position,
and it also has an anchor point,
which is the frame of
reference for the position.
And in this case,
we've drawn a crosshair in the
middle of this little graphic,
which is trying to represent
that the anchor point is
in the center of the layer.
And that basically means that
all transform and positioning
is happening relative to that
anchor point center in this case.
So you can see that when we take this
thing and map it into its super layer,
the first thing we do is align
the anchor point in the layer eye,
the center,
with the position in its super layer.
Next, there's also a transform
property on the layer.
What the transform does is
once it's been positioned,
it gives you a chance to kind
of scale and rotate and all
those kind of fun 3D things.
So you can see that the transform gets
applied once it's been positioned,
and in this case,
we're just going to rotate
and scale a little bit.
And that's basically the 90%
cases of all the geometry
stuff you want to care about.
Obviously,
we've only talked about 2D right now,
but 3D works in just the same way.
It's just that the matrices have
an extra column or something.
So now we talked about how this layer
graphic gets mapped from one from itself
its own coordinate space into its parent.
So let's talk a little bit more
about you know what is in that layer.
So there are a number of sub components
which come together to form the
layer image as I like to call it
and so these are things like the
background color property of the layer,
the contents,
the sub layers and the border color.
In this graphic they're actually
flipped upside down for some reason
but basically they're sover together,
sover compositing to give you
one image representing all
of the things in that layer.
So you know if you have any
drawn content and a border then
obviously the border will be
layered on top of the drawn content.
So at the end of that we have an image
but what do we do with that image?
Well there are a number of other
properties which can then modify
this thing we're creating.
So for example we can apply a list of
core image filters to do things like you
know blurring the contents of the layer
or changing its color for some reason.
We can also apply a 2D drop shadow
to give you know the standard kind
of drop shadow effects and then
finally we can apply some kind of
opacity fading and this basically
are all the effects that run in the
coordinate space of the layer itself.
So they're kind of the little the
things that fit in within that
little box of the previous diagram.
So the next part of this trip
to the compositing model,
I guess, is the compositing model itself.
And typically what you see on
screen is the 90% case again.
We have the layer image,
which is that little thing
we were just talking about.
We have the superlayer transform,
which is some matrix we're constructing
to represent all of that geometry
mapping we were talking about.
And then we have the backdrop.
The backdrop is everything that
has been rendered up to this
point from its sibling layers.
So if you have a parent
layer with five sublayers,
then we're going to render the first one,
then the next, and the next.
And then for each one,
the things that have been rendered
before it constitute its backdrop.
And so you can see that typically
we just do source over compositing,
because again,
that's what you want most of the time.
But there are a number of ways in
which we can modify this diagram.
So firstly,
you can add a compositing filter,
which is just a regular core image
filter with two input images.
And the idea of this is that
you can replace that source over
compositing by something more complex.
So you could think,
I think there are core image
filters which represent all of the,
for example, the PDF blend modes and
the Portaduff blend modes.
And you could even invent your own here.
So that's the idea.
So the next thing is we can add
a list of background filters.
And the background filters run
on the backdrop of the layer.
So it's kind of under siblings.
And this, again, is a list of filters.
And they're applied 1 through n.
And then the result of that is kind
of fed into the compositing filter.
So far, we've only talked about
two of these image inputs,
but there's actually a third one.
You also have a mask.
Every layer has a mask,
and it comes from two
separate components.
The layer has a mask layer, potentially,
and it also has this property
called masks-to-bounds.
And if masks-to-bounds is set,
then it says there's an implicit mask,
which is the shape of the layer.
And if the mask layer is set,
then it says, you know,
take the alpha channel of
this layer and treat that as
the mask of the layer itself.
And so both of those are set.
We'll just multiply them together to get,
you know, the cumulative mask.
And so what do we do with this?
First of all,
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so moving away from geometry,
now we're going to look at timing.
Timing is a very important
part of Core Animation because,
you know, we're animating,
so we have to have
some kind of time base.
So to that end,
every object in our object hierarchy,
be that layers and animations,
they all have local,
what we call timing spaces,
just like they have
local coordinate spaces.
And the way we deal with that is
when we start to render a frame,
you know, we have a global time,
which is wall clock time typically.
And so just like we map
geometry across the layer tree,
we also map timing or time.
So we'll start at the root
and then for every layer,
we'll map the time from its parent into
itself and then into its sub layers.
And so this lets you do very
interesting things because the
timing model is pretty rich.
and his list of properties
on the bottom bullet,
I guess.
So, you know,
things you can set are things like,
you can set the delay,
which is the begin time.
You can set the duration,
which is the length of time
the thing is gonna run for.
And then you can do
some other things like,
you know,
change the rate at which it progresses,
change the number of times it repeats,
and some other things.
This scary looking block of code is
basically the entire timing model.
So it's really just
here to show you that,
although this stuff may seem complex,
it's really kind of easy to reason
about because typically you only need
to look at some little parts of it.
So for example, if you wanted to pause
a movie or something,
you know, some open jail rendering
or a course composer,
then by looking at this
little kind of math,
you can see that what you do is
set speed to zero on the layer and
then change the time offset to kind
of push you along the timeline.
Obviously, when you set speed to zero,
because it's multiplying the parent time,
it's gonna clamp you to the start time.
The rest of that code is basically
just dealing with repeats and
playing backwards and forwards.
So now we can look at
an example of all this.
So here we have some kind of object,
you know, the round dot.
And we have its timeline.
And the timeline is going left to right.
And you can see in this block
there's kind of a diagonal line
showing progression of local time.
So that's all one that we have.
An object that's going
to run for 20 seconds.
And so let's add a child.
The child's timing properties are a
little different in that it's set to
begin two seconds after its parent began.
is the creator of Core Animation.
He is the creator of the
first ever video game,
and
- So adding a third sub-layer,
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so again, thinking about time,
I wanted to talk about how
animations are applied to layers.
Now,
we have this idea of a sandwich model,
which
basically comes from Smile.
Smile is a web, W3C animation standard,
and they kind of first,
at least what I first saw it.
And the idea is that you have model
layers and presentation layers.
Now, the model layer is the thing you
modify in your data structures.
That's why it's called the model,
it's your data model.
At least for the graphics.
And the presentation layer is
kind of a version of that with all
the current animations applied,
which may modify its properties
so that things that are animating
from A to B have intermediate
values to that position,
for example.
And then in between those two kind
of bottom to top of the sandwich,
we have all the animations that
have been attached to this object.
So in this case,
you can see we have four and
they have various timelines.
Again, time is left to right.
And so then it's pretty obvious, I guess,
how we're gonna evaluate this,
but we're gonna take a slice for a
particular time and then sample each of
these animation objects for that time.
And when we sample them,
that basically means doing the
interpolation and producing that,
and then the value of
that interpolated value,
which they wanna apply into the layer.
And obviously,
so we take the model layer,
and then after applying
all the animation values,
we end up with this presentation layer.
And that's the thing we're gonna,
you know,
[Transcript missing]
This section is trying to get away
from this kind of high-level view
we've just been talking about and
actually go straight to the bottom
and talk about lots of little details
that will be important to you.
We want to talk about subclassing.
So why would you subclass the layer?
Typically,
you want to subclass because you
want to add your own behavior.
So two common examples are you may
want to add your own drawing code or
you may want to add your own layout.
And by layout,
I mean potentially adding sublayers
and positioning them somewhere
within your local coordinate space.
So obviously the way we do this
is subclass in the normal way,
in the normal Objective-C way,
and then add properties.
Because if you want to have behavior,
you typically want to
customize that somehow.
So in this case,
we're going to add a single floating
point property in that interface.
And then in the implementation,
we're going to do something slightly
different in that we're not going
to try and implement it ourselves.
We're going to allow
Core Animation to do that for us.
And so by declaring the property dynamic,
it tells CA and Objective-C that you
don't have to do this at compile time,
but at run time,
we will synthesize all the methods
or everything that has to be done to
make this property actually exist.
So the next thing you may
want to do is look at this
default value for key method.
Default value for key is a
way of providing the initial
value of your property.
If you don't do this,
you'll just get some kind of
zero-like value or identity-like
in terms of matrices.
But if you want to have it default
to something other than a zero,
this is the way to do it because it's
much better than actually setting the
value to be its default value because
there is no storage associated with this.
So anyway,
so you would override the method,
check the key that you're
giving isn't my property,
and if it is, return some value.
And then any objects you
instantiate from this class,
if you actually looked at the
property values after being created,
they would have whatever default you set.
The next thing you can look at
in subclassing is the Will and
Did Change KBO methods.
These are a really good way
to get notifications when your
properties have been changed.
Continuing with this line width example,
if our line width changes and
presumably we want to use this to draw
a bunch of lines using Core Graphics,
then we really need to tell the layer,
"You need to redraw yourself because
you're out of date now." Again,
CoolSuper.
And finally, you know,
get to the meat of this in that the
reason we've done everything so far is
so we can override the draw method and
actually provide our custom drawing code.
And so to do that,
you will override this drawing
context method typically.
And so again, with this line width thing,
we're going to take the
current value of the property,
set it as the CG context line width,
and then presumably go
off and draw some lines.
One thing to bear in mind is
that if you don't use the dynamic
properties and you do implement
them statically using instance
variables or something like that,
you're going to have to do a lot of work.
And you should look at the documentation
on the net width layer method because you
have to implement that if you want to be
able to use kind of presentation layers
and animations in the best possible way.
So next, let's talk a little bit
more about animation.
So mostly so far,
we've been talking about
animation in terms of objects.
Now, objects you create and
attach to your layers,
and then they will go
off and do something.
And that's great,
and that's an underlying
fundamental model,
but a lot of the time,
you just want to set a
property and make it animate.
So by default,
we have a way of letting you do that,
and that's called implicit animation.
And what that really means is that
when you set properties of layers,
by default,
the engine will go away and create one
of these animation objects for you,
and then attach it to the layer.
And so typically,
we use basic animations here,
which are these from-to animating things,
because that's kind
of what we want to do.
And the from value is always
the current screen value,
and the to value is obviously
the new layer value.
And it's worth emphasizing
the screen value thing.
What this really means is that we're
going to take the value of the property,
and then we're going to animate
the property at the previous frame,
previous transaction,
and animate from that.
If you've already modified it,
so say you were to say letter
position equals 100 to 100,
and then the next line,
letter position equals 200 to 200,
you won't get an animation
from 100 to 100 to 200 to 200.
You'll get an animation from
wherever it used to be to 200 to 200.
Because typically,
we feel that's really what you want.
I mean, you don't want things to jump and
then animate from where they are now.
You want them to animate from where
they were to where they're going to be.
So finally,
one more point here is that we're
talking about numeric animations so far,
but a lot of the properties,
as I mentioned earlier,
don't support numeric animation,
things like filter
lists and what have you.
And in these cases,
the default will be to
create a transition here,
which will just cross-rate from
one state of the layer to the next.
And that's all great,
but every now and then,
the implicit animations
become kind of annoying.
You know, every now and then,
you don't want every property to animate,
or you want it to animate
in a different way.
And so when that happens,
the best thing is to turn them off
and then add your own animations
or don't add anything at all.
And there's a number of ways
in which you can add things.
Sorry, there's a number of ways in which
you can replace the existing ones.
The simplest is to basically just
set this transaction property to,
say, disable actions,
actions are kind of animations.
But the other way,
if you want a more persistent thing,
is you can actually subclass
the layer and implement some of
these action for key methods,
which actually give you a
chance to return any animation
object for any property change.
Okay,
so following on from the animation theme,
as I mentioned earlier,
one of the things you often want
to do is look at the current
state of the layer with its
animations already applied to it.
You know, if you want to hit test,
then you need to know exactly
where that thing is now,
not where it was before
the animation started.
So what the presentation layer does,
the presentation tree,
is it gives you a way to
get access to these objects.
So typically what you will do
is you will get a layer and say,
I want to know its current state.
So you will then call its
presentation layer method.
And what that does is it gives
you a copy of the layer back.
And the copy has already had
all the animations applied
to it for the current frame,
the current thing that's
probably on the screen.
So then you can go in
and look at it and say,
you know,
if I know I have an opacity animation,
then I want to look at the
opacity property to see,
you know,
what is the current value on the screen.
One other interesting point
about these presentation layers
is they actually form a tree,
which is why we call it
the presentation tree.
And what that means is if you get the
presentation layer and then ask it
for its sublayers or its superlayer,
then those things you get back will also
have their animations applied to them.
And that makes it pretty easy to
do certain types of operations on
the regular layer tree and certain
types on the animating layer tree,
the screen layer tree.
So the two examples we have here,
which are the most common
uses for this thing,
are that you can use it to produce
the form values for animations.
And this is obviously what
the implicit animation does.
So in this case,
we say we create an animation,
we set its keypad,
and then we'll set its form value
to be the current presentation value
of the property we're animating.
And then obviously add it to the layer.
And that's exactly what the
implicit animation is doing.
That's why I was stressing that
they animate from the current
screen value to the new value,
because they use the presentation tree.
So secondly, hit testing is the other
big use case for this.
So when hit testing,
you would just use the
normal hit test method,
but actually hit test on the
result of the presentation layer.
And because, as I said,
this gets you the animating sub-layers,
then you will actually basically
hit test across the entire tree in
its kind of current screen state.
And that will give you back something,
and that will still be a
presentation layer that you get back.
So that's why at the bottom we have
this call to the model layer method.
And what that does is it takes
the presentation layer we have
and gives you back the original
underlying model object.
So obviously if you're hit testing,
you want to find exactly
where you are or what you hit.
But you typically want to know, you know,
what is that in the layers I created,
not these ones we've just
been copied from somewhere.
and again the presentation tree is
really why you want to implement that
initWithLayer method I mentioned.
If you don't do that and you
have local state in your layers,
then things may not work quite right.
- Okay, so now we're gonna switch gears
and move away from animations
and talk about Tiled Layers.
So, you know,
we have this base class here layer,
and it can display, you know,
most types of, well,
pretty much any CG image.
There are problems in
terms of graphics cards.
Graphics cards can only really
display what they can texture from.
They typically put limits on the
size of the images you can display,
which is normally somewhat
bigger than your screen,
but not as big as the
largest camera picture today,
typically.
Other problems we have with
the base class layer are that
you don't have the ability to
provide multiple levels of detail,
or you don't have the ability to
provide the image data in little chunks.
It's all or nothing.
So what the Tiled Light does is
it gives you a way to define this
kind of tiled image pyramid thing.
and that means that we can get
the image data in lots of little
chunks and we also get them,
you know, not all ahead of time but we
get those little chunks from
you when we know we need them.
So you can imagine you could create a
million by a million pixel image through
one of these tile layers and then,
you know, scroll around the screen
and we will find out,
you know, exactly which tiles we need and
then ask you for them at that time.
Obviously, that has a lot of advantages.
One big change, I guess,
and you have to be aware of is that
if you buy into this tile layer model,
then you're also buying into the
fact that your drawing is now
all going to be asynchronous.
That means that, you know,
your drawing context method will no
longer be called on the main thread.
It will be called on
some background thread,
potentially more than one at a time.
And obviously, the reason for that,
again, is that, you know,
we want this thing to be kind
of smooth and fluid and we
don't want the UI to block.
And we want the images to come in
over time and in lots of levels.
pieces.
Here's a code example.
Basically,
what we're going to do here is just
create one of these tile layers,
set its levels of detail to say we have
eight layers in this image pyramid.
Obviously, any kind of pyramidal scheme,
it's going to be top level will
be 100%, then the next one will
be 50% scale factors and so on.
In this case,
we're also going to say bias
those scale factors up by three.
What that means is that we're actually
requesting the pyramid to store three
levels that are greater than 100%.
We're also going to get a 200% level,
a 400%, and an 800% level of detail.
The reason we're doing that
is because in this case,
we could be drawing things from
a PDF or from vector artwork.
In those cases,
we know that we can draw those as
finely as we want at any resolution.
If you zoom right in to 1,000%, then you
don't want the pixels to be blown up.
You want the tiles to be redrawn
for the current level of detail.
[Transcript missing]
The main thing about a Core Image,
a CI image,
is that it's not a Raster data structure.
It's not pixels.
It's kind of a recipe to produce pixels.
And that's great and
has a lot of advantages.
But it's not so great for
Core Animation because Core Animation is
totally built around this
idea of having things we can
give the graphics card to texture from.
So there is no way to just take a
CI image and put it into a layer.
You have to draw it
into that layer somehow.
And the most simplest way we can
find to do that is basically just
create a tile layer and just draw
the CI image into that tile layer.
The other method you
could use is using OpenGL.
And in some cases that can get
you a little more performance.
But again,
it has all these kind of GPU limits
and you have to use OpenGL.
You have to be aware of if
I create an image 10,000 by 10,000,
is that going to work on my current GPU?
So really we recommend you
just use the tile layer.
And then maybe think about other options
if that really doesn't cut it for you,
which we think it will.
So back, this is the kind of following
from the previous example.
So here we're going to actually
implement the draw method to draw
a CI image into our tile layer.
And you can see it really has
literally one long line of code.
So we're going to take the CI image
and draw it into the tile layer.
And because before the tile layer
handed us off our CG context,
it actually set up the scale
factors and the clipping rectangles
and all the kind of CTM stuff.
So all you really have to do
in the tile layer is just draw
whatever you're going to draw.
And then everything just works and
you only really draw the tile we care
about and at the right level of detail.
So at this point,
I want to show you a quick
demo of what I'm talking about.
[Transcript missing]
This is a 20-megapixel image.
You can see now we're showing at 12%.
This is like 80 megabytes of data.
And at all times, you know,
things stay pretty smooth and fluid and,
you know, the filters kind of still work.
You can see right now the
GPU is actually being pretty
taxed to render these filters.
You can see by the length of time
it takes the tiles to show up.
So anyway,
we think the title layer is pretty cool,
and we recommend you use it.
So back to the slides.
Thanks.
Okay, so next topic is 3D
because as everyone knows,
Core Animation is a 3D engine.
Well, it's not,
but a lot of the demos we show
you may give you that impression.
But so we should really
stress that CA is a 2D,
2.5D engine,
which means that it's lots of planes,
but they can be arranged in 3D space.
So what I want to talk about
is how you actually do that.
You know, how do you create these
demos or these planes?
And the way you do that is
you set up some kind of camera
matrix on your container layer.
And the way you do that is you use
the sublayer transform property.
Now, the sublayer transform was expressly
added just so you can have some matrix
which affects all of your sublayers.
And this is basically ideal for doing
kind of camera perspective type things
because that's really what you want.
I guess I should also say that this
is applied relative to the center
of the layer it's attached to,
just like the other transforms.
So in this case,
this little code example is going
to show you how to set up the
typical kind of camera matrix
which we use on all these 3D demos.
So the first couple of lines are
going to create the perspective
component of our matrix.
Currently we don't have a
function to do that for you,
but given that it's
only one line of code,
I'm not sure it's really worth it.
So anyway,
so you do this minus one over depth
thing in the right matrix component.
And this is basically going to
get you this perspective effect.
Because what this does is the, you know,
M three four basically means
take the Z component of my model,
divide it by something and
then add it to something else.
And then you get kind of the
perspective foreshortening effect.
The next two lines are applying
some kind of camera orientation
and positioning effect.
You do this after the projection,
after the perspective.
So in this case we have some
pre-cooked rotation matrix which
presumably we created through the
CA Transform 3D Rotate functions.
And then we're going to just offset
some XYZ amounts and then add
that to the sub-layer transform.
Once we've done that,
any sub-layer we put,
any layer we put as a sub-layer of
this guy with the sub-layer transform,
when we move him around and rotate him,
the perspective effects and
the camera effects will all
be applied to him pretty much,
you know, they just will.
So then the next part is
once you have this 3D space,
then you need to position
things within it.
The way you do that is with
the standard position property,
but also with the Z position.
You know, now we're in 3D space,
so the Z component of the layers
becomes important because that's
where the foreshortening and
the perspective comes from.
So then you can also use the anchor point
again to control the reference point.
And in New and Snow Leopard we've
added this anchor point Z thing,
which means you can actually now
get full kind of 3D control of your
reference point for transforms.
And that's very nice because
that means you can now have,
you know, 3D layers which rotate about
an arbitrary point in space.
You know, not their center, but,
you know, some point elsewhere.
Also, as was mentioned earlier,
we're now trying to add some of the
3D layers to the reference point.
So we're now trying to add support
for true intersections between layers.
So, you know,
if you have two layers which
kind of look like this,
then we will slice them up in
the right way and render the
slices in the right order.
And again, that's something that's
expensive for us to do,
so, you know,
only do that if you have to,
but it can make things look a
lot better when they intersect.
Okay, so next on our whirlwind tour
of random topics is threading.
I don't think we've talked a
whole lot about this in the past.
Basically, you may want to use threads
for drawing these days.
You have lots of cores,
and lots of them are going
to be used for data work,
but graphics can be threaded as well.
To that end, CA Layer is itself basically
entirely thread-safe.
This means you can set any property,
you can get any property,
you can do basically any restructuring,
changing the sub-layers,
all these kind of things.
We will pretty much guarantee
that when you do that,
you're never going to
corrupt our data structures.
And we will pretty much do that
until you get the right results.
So the one thing that isn't done for you,
though, is that when you fetch
a property of a layer,
the value you get back is not guaranteed
to be valid if another thread is setting
the same property at the same time.
Now, you can imagine two threads come in.
They both set the background
color of a particular layer.
And then one of them fetches
that property while the
other one is about to set it.
And now you're kind of in
this window of uncertainty.
And the object you get back may
or may not still be valid because,
you know,
we don't auto-release things when we give
them back to you for performance reasons.
So it's kind of up to
you to guarantee that,
you know, anything you fetch remains good
for the lifetime you need it.
We now have a way to let you do that,
which is by adding
these transaction locks.
The idea here is that these are
the same locks we use internally.
You can take the transaction lock,
do any kind of
read-modify-write style code,
and then unlock the transaction lock.
It has to be emphasized
that this is a spin lock.
If you hold this thing
for a long period of time,
everything is going to grind to
a halt in a pretty nasty way.
But the idea is you can at least
have enough synchronization
to let you query a property,
retain it,
or set something else based on its value,
before you then unlock and then
use your retained value or go
along and do something else.
One other thing worth mentioning
about threading is that you may
be able to avoid it entirely just
by using the set-by-the-key path.
Obviously, if you were going to set a
sub-property of an object,
like a filter, for example,
then filters are not thread-safe.
So you can't just go off and set
those properties directly if multiple
threads are going to be doing that.
However,
if you use the set-value-of-key-path
with the right current construction of a
key-path to reference the right property,
then we will make sure,
because we have copies
of all these filters,
that we will make sure that
everything works as intended.
And I guess the side effect of that
is you'll also be able to get implicit
animations on these filter properties,
because that's kind of done the same way.
One more point about threading is that
we try to guarantee that when you call,
"Send these display on a layer," then we
will call your display or drawing context
method on exactly the same thread,
because that's pretty important if
you want to multi-thread your drawing.
That also holds for the layout
methods and basically any other
callbacks we might be issuing.
And finally,
this is back to the two trees thing.
As I said earlier,
we need a run loop to be able to
flush out your updates for you.
So if you're on a background thread
and you're making layer changes,
then you may not have a run loop,
or if you do, it may not be running.
Or running fast often enough
to push your changes out.
So the simple solution there is
that every time you do something
and you're about to block,
or sleep, or whatever,
then you can just call this
transaction flush method,
and that will basically push any
cute changes that are in your
current thread off to the screen.
And that's the thing we're going to
be doing automatically in most cases,
but you need to do it sometimes.
Okay, so most of, up to this point,
what I've been talking
about has been very general.
You know, just CA as an API,
no real platform dependencies,
apart from things like Core Image.
But so, obviously,
CA runs on both platforms
we have these days,
you know, iPhone and Mac.
And iPhone is a lot smaller a
platform than the Macintosh,
the Mac.
So, when we took CA to the iPhone,
we really decided that, you know,
we could only afford to take the
bits of it that we really needed.
Or that we really thought that
were things we could do with
the most possible performance.
So, anything else we kind of left behind,
at least for now.
There's this list of properties which
were removed from the Mac version
as we took it to the iPhone.
You can't do things like
rounded corners yet,
you can't do borders, masks, shadows,
filters, obviously, layout managers.
We really don't think
this is a big problem.
Most of these things,
if we did implement them,
they'd be so slow you
wouldn't use them anyway.
And the other thing is, you know,
they're just kind of convenience things.
Like, layout managers can be implemented
just by subclassing and using
the layout sublets method.
So the next point is,
I'm sure you're aware of this,
but the coordinate system
or the coordinate space in
the iPhone is upside down,
at least to us Mac people.
And what that means is that, you know,
if you have code that you
want to run in both places,
then you need to deal with that somehow.
And so up to this point,
it was kind of hard to do that because
if you just flip the transform,
that doesn't do the right thing because,
you know, your images flip as well.
Whereas images have a native
kind of memory ordering,
which, you know, needs to remain static.
So we added in 10.6 this new
property called Geometry Flipped.
And what that does is when
you set that on a layer,
the entire subtree from
that point becomes flipped,
but only for geometry.
And so the idea here is that
you can take code that runs on
the iPhone for the producer's,
say, layer subtree,
and take it back to the Mac, you know,
attach it to some layer you have,
set the Geometry Flipped
property to be yes.
And then hopefully
everything will just work.
work correctly.
- This is the idea.
So again,
it's worth emphasizing that the images
will not be flipped by this thing.
You know, because images are images and
they have just the standard order,
and you always want them to
come up the right way up.
So now let's talk a little
bit about performance.
And these things apply mostly
both to the Mac and the iPhone.
Obviously, performance is more of an
issue on iPhone because,
you know,
it has a lot less capable hardware,
although it does also
have a smaller screen,
of course.
So firstly,
the number one thing you want to do,
if you can,
is avoid all off-screen rendering.
And what off-screen rendering is,
is that every now and then,
most of the time we're going
along happily using OpenGL when
we're rendering things,
and we're just taking the layers
you give us and just drawing
them straight to the screen.
But every now and then,
there are certain types of effects,
which means we have to
halt the screen rendering,
create a new buffer to draw into,
a new image, if you like,
draw things into this,
and then copy that to the screen.
And that works out fine.
It's really still a lot faster than,
you know, anything else we could do.
But there is a bottleneck there.
I mean, it does, you can noticeably see
the speed dropping,
especially on the iPhone,
where it's much more of a cliff than a,
you know, bump or something.
So the list of things you should avoid
if you want to avoid off-screen rendering
is having group opacity effects,
where you have, you know,
a layer and a bunch of sub-layers,
and then you change the
opacity of the parent layer.
Obviously,
what we have to do to render that
is we can't just multiply the
opacity through all the layers.
Because we'll get the wrong result.
So we have to, you know,
do off-screen rendering.
Similarly, any kind of masking,
which isn't particularly simple.
Any type of core image
filters or shadows,
although those are already
only on the Mac right now.
And certain types of transition effects
and certain types of 3D transforms.
If you have a layer and a sub-layer
and they both have a 3D matrix,
then because we're a 2D model,
they have to be kind of
projected back into 2D space.
And then we have to do that twice,
then we have to render
one of them off-screen.
The next performance rule
is minimize blending.
Blending is where you see
translucency in your UI.
The way graphics cards work is if
you're just drawing opaque data,
you can splat it straight
to the destination.
But if you're drawing things which are
translucent or have an alpha channel,
when you're drawing them,
the graphics card will
have to look at the pixel,
take the value of the destination,
read it back,
and then do some math between
the two and then copy that
back to the destination again.
And that kind of costs quite a lot,
especially because it also means that
we have to actually draw the things
that are underneath translucent content,
whereas if we know
that things are opaque,
then we can just most of the time avoid
entirely drawing anything underneath it.
So this is really key,
and especially on the iPhone where,
again, the hardware is more limited,
so the amount of throw rate,
the amount of blending bandwidth
you have is a lot less.
So what do we want to do to avoid this?
Basically, we just want to get rid of the
alpha channel from our layers.
So if we're drawing into the layer,
the way we would do that is we
will basically set the opaque
property of the layer to be yes.
And that basically tells CA that
when it's asking you to draw into the
backing store of the image of the layer,
then don't bother
creating an alpha channel.
Similarly,
if you're providing CG image data
by just sending the contents of
the layer to this image object,
then you need to make sure
that it has no alpha channel.
I should just say that setting the
opaque property on these kind of
layers has absolutely no effect.
So how do you create an image
without an alpha channel?
Well, obviously,
if you're reading an image from a
disk or a flash or some kind of file,
then you need to make sure that the
image format does the right thing.
So you may want to use a JPEG because
they don't have alpha channels.
Apparently,
there may be some ways you can
create pings without alpha channels.
And then, alternatively,
if you're going to create
the image from data,
you know, you have some raster in memory,
then just use the image alpha
none bitmap formats in CG.
That tells us that you
have no alpha data.
So one thing I should also say is that,
you know,
if you're drawing into the layer and you,
well, if you're,
for some reason you can't remove
the alpha channel because,
you know,
you need these things to blend together
and performance is still too bad,
then you may want to consider
collapsing some of your layer trees.
So, you know,
anything we can composite at runtime,
if it's not animating,
you can composite at draw time.
So now you can have one layer and
draw two images into it rather than
having two layers with an image each.
And obviously anything you can do
ahead of time once rather than us
doing it a million times every frame
is going to make things a lot faster.
Okay, so, you know,
this is kind of hard to actually
even discover when this is happening.
You just see things are slow.
So we do give you some debugging options.
And so basically you just
set the CA color opaque
environment variable on the Mac.
And on the iPhone,
the way to set the same option
is via the Instruments panel.
So you can see I've highlighted it on
screen here just so you know where it is.
And Instruments actually
has a number of interesting
Core Animation options to do things like,
you know, flashing random parts of the
layers when you're drawing them.
Highlighting things in other
colors based on what's happening.
But this diagram really just shows you
this opaque opacity blending thing.
And so what you can see here is
I cooked up some boring Nib file
in IB and then put it up on the
iPhone and turned on this option.
And you can see here that, you know,
the green things are good,
they're opaque.
And the red things are bad,
they're translucent.
And so this is what you'll see if you
turn on this option with the UI running.
And the idea here is, or the goal,
I guess, is to make basically get rid of
all the red as much as possible.
And if you do that,
you should see frame rates
improve pretty dramatically.
Okay, so we're on to the last
section of the talk now.
And finally,
I wanted to talk about what is
coming up in the next OS release.
So just a few of the key features.
So first of all,
we're going to add support
for trilinear filtering,
and this is really just exposing
a graphics card feature.
Trilinear filtering is a way to get
good quality downsampling of images
because it's also called MIP mapping,
and the image you pass the GPU then
has multiple levels of detail,
again, kind of similar to the tile layer.
And the graphics card will
select the most optimal level,
and this basically means you get better
quality images on the screen because
there's a lot less alienating if you pick
a small image if you need a small image.
And also it's faster because you
can minimize the bandwidth the
graphics card is actually using.
So this is very easy for you to set up.
It works on all types of layers,
or all types of image-based layers,
I should say.
But the one drawback is that
not all graphics cards support
this on all images yet.
So you can... see the
OpenGL documentation.
But basically,
if you have a power of two size image,
it's 256 by 256, or 256 by 128,
or something like that,
then it's pretty much
guaranteed to always work.
If your image is not power of two size,
then it will work on some graphics cards,
and anything else will just
fall back to the regular method,
so it's not terrible.
There's also an LOD bias property,
and that is kind of a graphics-y term,
but it basically means
you have the slider,
and one end is sharp, one end is blurry,
and you can kind of move
yourself along the slider.
Oh, I should also point out that
this now works with Tidal layer.
So you can kind of get some level of
trilinear three-way filtering by setting
that property on the Tidal layer.
And in this case,
it's not a true per-pixel
graphics card-based property.
[Transcript missing]
So, secondly, we added a gradient layer.
The gradient layer is just
a subclass of the CA layer.
And as its name suggests,
it will draw a gradient into its shape.
So it's just an axial gradient right now.
And you get to specify
an array of colors,
an array of locations
for those color stops.
You can say this one is
here to here and then here.
And you also get to specify two
two-dimensional points within
the layer shape to give kind
of the endpoints of the axis.
So then that defines your gradient.
And then what we do then is just
draw that using the gradient layer.
So, basically,
we're just going to use the gradient
layer to draw the gradient in the GPU.
And obviously, because these are just
kind of numeric properties,
you can animate all of them
using the regular CA animation.
So you can animate
colors fading in and out,
the gradient spinning around
or moving the gradient stops.
Kind of everything is up for grabs.
Another example should be
fairly self-explanatory.
We're just really creating layers,
setting up much properties again.
So let's not dwell on that.
So the next new subclass is
called the CA Transform layer.
This is a little different.
So up to this point,
we've talked about 3D and
we've talked about 2 and 1/2D.
And layers, we've always said, are 2D,
which means that you take this
2D graphic element and then you
push it into its parent in some
three-dimensional space and then
flatten it into the parent's plane,
thus preserving the 2D-ness
throughout the entire pipeline.
And that's great.
It means you can do kind of
2D imaging effects on 3D,
pseudo-3D content.
But it means you can't set up very
complex hierarchical models of 3D
elements and transform them as groups.
So for example,
you wouldn't be able to create
a cube out of six faces and
then rotate the entire thing.
You'd have to create those six layers
and then rotate each one of them
separately about some center point.
And as you can imagine,
that's either impossible or gets really,
really complex really quickly.
So what a transform layer does is it
basically extends the layer model a
little bit and says these are layers
which are only grouping constructs.
They don't have any content of their own.
You set the image to be something,
you'll get a warning
and nothing will happen.
But their geometry does
apply into their sub-layers,
but without this flattening step.
So now you can see that you can do
these kind of cube-like effects in
this model because you can create
a transform layer and give it six
faces and animate the rotation
properties of the transform layer.
And everything will rotate without being
flattened into some kind of mushy mess.
The way we do that internally,
which is worth bearing in mind
for things like depth sorting,
is that any sub-layers of the transform
layer are effectively hoisted up
into its super layer before we do
any of this kind of processing.
We take the matrix from
the transform layer,
concatenate it into the layer itself,
and then push it all back
up to the next level.
So we'll have a demo of
this in a little bit.
Finally,
the last feature is our particle systems.
You've probably seen these
things in any number of movies,
and ours is not quite that cool.
It's basically a way to kind of spew
out lots of little images and have some
kind of control over where they go.
And so, you know,
you see a lot of the keynote
presentations you see at this
conference have these little
kind of sparkly effects,
and that's kind of things you
can do with particle systems.
So our particle system is
structured as another layer
subclass called the emitter layer,
and then each emitter layer
has a number of cells.
And a cell is basically a way to kind of
a template for particles being emitted.
Now, the layer has what we
call an emission shape,
which a number of different options,
things like, you know, rectangles,
circles, spheres, cubes, etc.
And then the cells then define how
particles are emitted from those
shapes over time and at certain rates.
And obviously,
since the cells have these kind
of template-like properties,
every particle will have some
set of these properties with some
kind of randomization factors.
And one really interesting feature
is that cells are not limited
to just emitting particles.
The particles they can emit can also
emit particles themselves because
cells can have subcells and so on.
So you can kind of create these nice
organic-like effects with things emitting
things emitting things and what have you.
Finally, emitter layers are also kind
of similar to transform layers
in that they have this 2D,
3D option.
If you choose by default that 2D,
and that basically means that, again,
all of their particles are flattened into
their layer plane as they're rendered,
but if you say,
"I want a 3D particle emitter,"
then what actually happens is they
act kind of like a transformer,
and their particles are all
rendered into the parent,
which means they preserve the 3D geometry
into whatever else is in the parent.
So now, I want to show you a couple of
demos of these new features.
Okay, so first of all,
this is the example of
the transform layer.
And so you can see now
we have these two cubes.
This is a very quick demo.
So we have these two cubes.
They're spinning.
You can see they're spinning separately,
but they're living in the
same kind of 3D space.
And this is really very simple
now because we just have
animations on the two layers.
But then we thought, well,
let's take it up another level and
put them inside another transform
layer with another cube and then
just kind of rotate that as well.
And you can see the things inside are
still rotating in their own little space,
but now they're being kind
of modified by the bitcube.
And this is the kind of thing which,
you know, I'm not even sure if you could
do this with the old model,
but it would be a lot of
math and a lot of pain.
Okay.
So now let's look at the particle system.
So this is a pretty
simple particle system.
It has three objects.
It has an emitter layer, a cell,
which is emitting the
first big blobby spark.
And then that also has a subcell,
which is emitting the spark,
the little shower of fireworks.
And so we do something where we play with
the timing of the subcell so that it only
fires for a very brief period of time,
when the other one gets
to a certain point.
And then there's this big kind of shower,
because we set the emission rate,
which is the thing that controls how
many particles are emitted per second,
to some big value.
So if I highlight the layer here,
you can see that the emitter
layer is not clipping right now.
But we can turn that on if we want.
So now the emitter is
clipping its boundaries.
And as I said,
it's being flattened into 2D space.
So you can see it really
is acting like a plane.
So,
it's kind of more fun though if I turn
off the clipping and turn on the 3D.
And that doesn't really do
anything now because we're face-on,
but you can see when I start to rotate
this thing that now we have a kind of a
3D kind of particle thing going on here.
And I guess I can also
animate this thing.
So, I mean, like I said,
this is very little amount of code,
and we have these kind of nice
effects going on with nice,
lots of smooth animation.
So one other example of these,
which is basically the same demo app,
so don't expect anything new,
is another kind of particle system.
Again,
we have this kind of rotation feature.
[Transcript missing]
So I guess one other thing
worth mentioning is I'm doing
this kind of pausing thing.
And that's basically done with a timing
model where when I'm starting to scrub,
I'm just setting the time,
the speed of the emission layer to
be zero and changing the time offset
to clamp me to my current point
as I tried to describe earlier.
So it's kind of a nice effect.
Okay, so...
So with that, I think we're about done.
Tomorrow, there's another
Core Animation related session,
which is Troy's
layer-backed view session,
which has a lot of NSV type stuff,
but also a lot of just
general Core Animation things.
So you should definitely go to that.
Finally,
we're going to have a lab after this,
which I guess is downstairs
in the graphics lab.